README.md, before:

# OmniAuth ORCID

ORCID OAuth 2.0 Strategy for the wonderful [OmniAuth Ruby authentication framework](http://www.omniauth.org).

Provides basic support for connecting a client application to the [Open Researcher & Contributor ID registry service](http://orcid.org).

Originally created for the [ORCID example client application in Rails](https://github.com/gthorisson/ORCID-example-client-app-rails), then turned into a gem.



## Installation

The usual way with Bundler: add the following to your `Gemfile` to install the current version of the gem:

```ruby
gem 'omniauth-orcid'
```

Or, if you're impatient, you can install straight from GitHub

```ruby
gem 'omniauth-orcid' , :git => 'git://github.com/gthorisson/omniauth-orcid.git'
```

Then run `bundle install` to install into your environment.

You can also install the gem system-wide in the usual way:

```bash
[mummi@nfmac07]gem install omniauth-orcid
```

## Getting started

Like other OmniAuth strategies, `OmniAuth::Strategies::ORCID` is a piece of Rack middleware. Please read the OmniAuth documentation for detailed instructions: https://github.com/intridea/omniauth.


By default the module connects to the live ORCID service. In the very simplest usage, all you have to provide are your client app credentials ([see more here](http://support.orcid.org/knowledgebase/articles/116739)):

```ruby
use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, ENV['ORCID_KEY'], ENV['ORCID_SECRET']
end
```

OmniAuth takes care of the OAuth external-authentication handshake or "dance". All that the gem does is grab the identifier and tokens at the end of the dance and stick it into the OmniAuth hash which is subsequently accessible to your app via `request.env['omniauth.auth']` (see [AuthHashSchema](https://github.com/intridea/omniauth/wiki/Auth-Hash-Schema)). The hash looks something like this:

```json
{
  provider: "orcid",
  uid: "0000-0003-2012-0010",
  info: {
  name: null
},
credentials: {
  token: "e82938fa-a287-42cf-a2ce-f48ef68c9a35",
  refresh_token: "f94c58dd-b452-44f4-8863-0bf8486a0071",
  expires_at: 1979903874,
  expires: true
},
extra: { }
}
```

You have to implement a callback handler to grab at least the `uid` from the hash and (typically) save it in a session. This effectively provides basic "Log in with your ORCiD" functionality.

Most likely, with the token in hand, you'll want to do something more sophisticated with the API, like retrieving profile data and do something cool with it. See the API guide for more details:

http://support.orcid.org/knowledgebase/articles/116874-orcid-api-guide



Here's how to get going with a couple of popular Rack-based frameworks:


### Sinatra


Configure the strategy and implement a callback routine in your app:

```ruby
require 'sinatra'
require 'sinatra/config_file'
require 'omniauth-orcid'
enable :sessions

use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, ENV['ORCID_KEY'], ENV['ORCID_SECRET']
end
...
get '/auth/orcid/callback' do
  session[:omniauth] = request.env['omniauth.auth']
  redirect '/'
end

get '/' do
  
  if session[:omniauth]
    @orcid = session[:omniauth][:uid]
  end
  ..
```

The bundled `demo.rb` file contains an uber-simple working Sinatra example app. Spin it up, point your browser to http://localhost:4567/ and play:

```bash
gem install sinatra
ruby demo.rb
[2012-11-26 21:41:08] INFO  WEBrick 1.3.1
[2012-11-26 21:41:08] INFO  ruby 1.9.3 (2012-04-20) [x86_64-darwin11.3.0]
== Sinatra/1.3.2 has taken the stage on 4567 for development with backup from WEBrick
[2012-11-26 21:41:08] INFO  WEBrick::HTTPServer#start: pid=8383 port=4567

```


### Rails 


Add this to `config/initializers/omniauth.rb` to configure the strategy:

```ruby
require 'omniauth-orcid'

Rails.application.config.middleware.use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, ENV['ORCID_KEY'], ENV['ORCID_SECRET']
end
```

Register a callback path in 'config/routes.rb'

```ruby
..
  match '/auth/:provider/callback' => 'authentications#create'
..
```

Implement a callback handler method in a controller:

```ruby
class AuthenticationsController < ApplicationController
  ..
  def create
    omniauth = request.env["omniauth.auth"]
    session[:omniauth] = omniauth
    session[:params]   = params
    ..
  end
```


## Configuration

You can also grab parameters from a config file (recommended) and pass
to the strategy, along with other options specific to your app. The OAuth scope or
scopes in particular frequently need to be customized. Here's an example from the bundled Sinatra app in `demo.rb`:

*UPDATE The [omniauth-oauth2 gem](https://github.com/intridea/omniauth-oauth2)  was recently been updated to process options slightly differently. The `:scope` string must now be passed in via  `:authorize_params`, see below*

```ruby
config_file 'config.yml'
use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, settings.client_id, settings.client_secret, 
    :authorize_params => {
      :scope => '/orcid-profile/read-limited'
    },
  :client_options => {
    :site => settings.site, 
    :authorize_url => settings.authorize_url,
    :token_url => settings.token_url
  }
end

```

Different sets of params from `config.yml` are used for production environment (points to live ORCID service) vs. development environment (points to ORCID sandbox service).

You can do something similar with in Rails with the same config file, or something . See a working example here: https://github.com/gthorisson/ORCID-example-client-app-rails



## More information 

* ORCID Open Source Project - https://github.com/ORCID/ORCID-Source
* Developer Wiki - https://github.com/ORCID/ORCID-Source/wiki
* Technical community - http://orcid.org/about/community/orcid-technical-community



## License

The MIT License (OSI approved, see more at http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php)

=============================================================================

Copyright (C) 2012 by Gudmundur A. Thorisson

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
THE SOFTWARE.

=============================================================================

![Open Source Initiative Approved License](http://www.opensource.org/trademarks/opensource/web/opensource-110x95.jpg)

Commit message:

add public API docs to the README

README.md, after:

# OmniAuth ORCID

ORCID OAuth 2.0 Strategy for the wonderful [OmniAuth Ruby authentication framework](http://www.omniauth.org).

Provides basic support for connecting a client application to the [Open Researcher & Contributor ID registry service](http://orcid.org).

Originally created for the [ORCID example client application in Rails](https://github.com/gthorisson/ORCID-example-client-app-rails), then turned into a gem.



## Installation

The usual way with Bundler: add the following to your `Gemfile` to install the current version of the gem:

```ruby
gem 'omniauth-orcid'
```

Or, if you're impatient, you can install straight from GitHub

```ruby
gem 'omniauth-orcid' , :git => 'git://github.com/gthorisson/omniauth-orcid.git'
```

Then run `bundle install` to install into your environment.

You can also install the gem system-wide in the usual way:

```bash
[mummi@nfmac07]gem install omniauth-orcid
```

## Getting started

Like other OmniAuth strategies, `OmniAuth::Strategies::ORCID` is a piece of Rack middleware. Please read the OmniAuth documentation for detailed instructions: https://github.com/intridea/omniauth.


By default the module connects to the live ORCID service. In the very simplest usage, all you have to provide are your client app credentials ([see more here](http://support.orcid.org/knowledgebase/articles/116739)):

```ruby
use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, ENV['ORCID_KEY'], ENV['ORCID_SECRET']
end
```

OmniAuth takes care of the OAuth external-authentication handshake or "dance". All that the gem does is grab the identifier and tokens at the end of the dance and stick it into the OmniAuth hash which is subsequently accessible to your app via `request.env['omniauth.auth']` (see [AuthHashSchema](https://github.com/intridea/omniauth/wiki/Auth-Hash-Schema)). The hash looks something like this:

```json
{
  provider: "orcid",
  uid: "0000-0003-2012-0010",
  info: {
  name: null
},
credentials: {
  token: "e82938fa-a287-42cf-a2ce-f48ef68c9a35",
  refresh_token: "f94c58dd-b452-44f4-8863-0bf8486a0071",
  expires_at: 1979903874,
  expires: true
},
extra: { }
}
```

You have to implement a callback handler to grab at least the `uid` from the hash and (typically) save it in a session. This effectively provides basic "Log in with your ORCiD" functionality.

Most likely, with the token in hand, you'll want to do something more sophisticated with the API, like retrieving profile data and do something cool with it. See the API guide for more details:

http://support.orcid.org/knowledgebase/articles/116874-orcid-api-guide



Here's how to get going with a couple of popular Rack-based frameworks:


### Sinatra


Configure the strategy and implement a callback routine in your app:

```ruby
require 'sinatra'
require 'sinatra/config_file'
require 'omniauth-orcid'
enable :sessions

use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, ENV['ORCID_KEY'], ENV['ORCID_SECRET']
end
...
get '/auth/orcid/callback' do
  session[:omniauth] = request.env['omniauth.auth']
  redirect '/'
end

get '/' do
  
  if session[:omniauth]
    @orcid = session[:omniauth][:uid]
  end
  ..
```

The bundled `demo.rb` file contains an uber-simple working Sinatra example app. Spin it up, point your browser to http://localhost:4567/ and play:

```bash
gem install sinatra
ruby demo.rb
[2012-11-26 21:41:08] INFO  WEBrick 1.3.1
[2012-11-26 21:41:08] INFO  ruby 1.9.3 (2012-04-20) [x86_64-darwin11.3.0]
== Sinatra/1.3.2 has taken the stage on 4567 for development with backup from WEBrick
[2012-11-26 21:41:08] INFO  WEBrick::HTTPServer#start: pid=8383 port=4567

```


### Rails 


Add this to `config/initializers/omniauth.rb` to configure the strategy:

```ruby
require 'omniauth-orcid'

Rails.application.config.middleware.use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, ENV['ORCID_KEY'], ENV['ORCID_SECRET']
end
```

Register a callback path in 'config/routes.rb'

```ruby
..
  match '/auth/:provider/callback' => 'authentications#create'
..
```

Implement a callback handler method in a controller:

```ruby
class AuthenticationsController < ApplicationController
  ..
  def create
    omniauth = request.env["omniauth.auth"]
    session[:omniauth] = omniauth
    session[:params]   = params
    ..
  end
```


## Configuration

You can also grab parameters from a config file (recommended) and pass
to the strategy, along with other options specific to your app. The OAuth scope or
scopes in particular frequently need to be customized. Here's an example from the bundled Sinatra app in `demo.rb`:

*UPDATE The [omniauth-oauth2 gem](https://github.com/intridea/omniauth-oauth2)  was recently been updated to process options slightly differently. The `:scope` string must now be passed in via  `:authorize_params`, see below*

```ruby
config_file 'config.yml'
use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, settings.client_id, settings.client_secret, 
    :authorize_params => {
      :scope => '/orcid-profile/read-limited'
    },
  :client_options => {
    :site => settings.site, 
    :authorize_url => settings.authorize_url,
    :token_url => settings.token_url
  }
end

```

Different sets of params from `config.yml` are used for production environment (points to live ORCID service) vs. development environment (points to ORCID sandbox service).

You can do something similar with in Rails with the same config file, or something . See a working example here: https://github.com/gthorisson/ORCID-example-client-app-rails

### Authentication Only

By default, this gem will request a token with permission to use the ORCID member API. If you only need to authenticate the user and verify their ORCID, you can configure omniauth-orcid to use the public ORCID API. The returned token has significantly reduced permissions, but it's free.

To use the public authentication-only API, configure omniauth-orcid like so:

```ruby
require 'omniauth-orcid'

use OmniAuth::Builder do
  provider :orcid, ENV['ORCID_KEY'], ENV['ORCID_SECRET'], authorize_params: {scope: "/authenticate"}, client_options: {token_url: "https://pub.orcid.org/oauth/token"}
end

```

## More information 

* ORCID Open Source Project - https://github.com/ORCID/ORCID-Source
* Developer Wiki - https://github.com/ORCID/ORCID-Source/wiki
* Technical community - http://orcid.org/about/community/orcid-technical-community



## License

The MIT License (OSI approved, see more at http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php)

=============================================================================

Copyright (C) 2012 by Gudmundur A. Thorisson

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
THE SOFTWARE.

=============================================================================

![Open Source Initiative Approved License](http://www.opensource.org/trademarks/opensource/web/opensource-110x95.jpg)
